Welcome, this is the 12th session of the PBC Morning Dawn Study Group from Padmasamy Ling Monastery
and Retreat Center in New York.
Today we'll be discussing Chapter 12 of the Venerable Kamparomache's book, "The Buddhist Path,"
and the chapter is entitled, "Meditating on the True Nature of the Mind."
So we'll begin with the opening prayers, and then we'll go into the discussion. Thanks so much for
joining us.
[Singing in Dzogchen]
The supreme tradition of the glorious Buddha Padmasambhava, which is the essential, extraordinary
view and doctrine of the early translation school,
you keep alive and spread by the light of wisdom. Lord of Dharma, great temple, I pray at your lot
us' feet.
In the palace of the oatman Dhamdattu, the essence of all the Buddhists of the three times,
the one who shows clearly the dharmakaya of my own mind, we pray to the honorable Rukuru,
glorious root teacher of precious one, dwelling on the lotus' seed and the crown of my head.
Hold me with your great kindness and bestow the accomplishments of body, speech and mind.
[Singing in Dzogchen]
Thanks, so we're beginning in chapter 12, it's page 61 in the Buddhist Path.
And so I'll give a really quick summary of this first half or so of the chapter.
So the first paragraph, Khmerubache say that in meditation practice,
once the body is balanced with good posture and the speech is balanced with natural breathing,
the next step is to balance the mind by keeping it in its natural state.
The meditation instructions for this practice are simple.
Sit with a good posture and maintain your mind in its natural balance without being disturbed by
thoughts or experiences.
In Zochen meditation there is nothing to do aside from relaxing your awareness in its natural
clarity.
Experience the nature of your mind as being spacious like the sky.
The third paragraph, Rupache say you can practice this meditation any time.
You already have this nature and don't have to change what you truly are.
Recognize your natural state and this by itself will remove what is unnatural.
Maintaining your awareness in its natural state takes some effort
since our habits of not being in this state are so strong.
And then the nature of mind is inexpressible and inconceivable
though it can be experienced directly by our own awareness.
Don't follow your thoughts, watch your mind with mindfulness.
Meditate with a relaxed mind but don't be so relaxed that you keep postponing your practice
or you fall asleep during your session.
The mind has to be mindful, clear and gentle.
So then we'll go into the first topic question.
Meditating on the nature of the mind is something you can do anytime.
You don't have to go somewhere special to acquire the nature of the mind.
You don't need to buy it from a store or dig it up from the earth, it's always available.
During meditation you do not need to think of any particular thoughts
or make any effort to change what you are.
Just simply maintain where you are and what you are without trying to do anything unusual.
If you meditate by simply maintaining the natural state then everything unnatural will be removed.
You do not have to do anything except remain on your cushion.
In one sense this is something of a joke but in another sense it is true.
You simply relax on your cushion and that's it.
Although meditation does not demand any physical activity
you do have to maintain the meditative state and this takes some effort.
Effort is not actually part of the basic ground nature
but since our obscurations and ignorance are so strong
it requires effort to make meditation natural.
When meditating in this way it is not necessary to fight with the obscurations.
As your practice develops power it will spontaneously remove the obscurations
since they are not part of the primordial nature.
This practice will reveal more and more of the basic ground of primordial wisdom.
The rising sun does not fight with the darkness
just as its presence makes darkness disappear.
In the same way when we meditate
the presence of the primordial nature overcomes ignorance.
Page 61, third paragraph, page 62, the first full paragraph.
One of the things I was wondering about, kind of from a practical experience point of view
that sentence, you simply relax on your cushion and that's it.
I was curious like what kind of mistakes or things that kind of came up for y'all when you first
heard that
because it seems like one of those things where it's so simple it's hard
or there's also lots of assumptions you could make about it.
So I was curious what y'all thought.
I mean in a way it seems like all the instructions are all about
the setting up those good conditions that we receive.
Even how this chapter comes after setting up the good conditions with clearing,
balancing the winds and channels and having good posture, things like that.
Of course in all these teachings and then specifically with meditation
you know there's a shamatha, a comma binding, I think we go on to that.
So I think, I mean in a nutshell maybe, all the basic instructions we've received
about meditation are exactly inseparable from
they're all about just setting up good conditions to relax and undo.
And then also right here in the chapter you know not things, I mean it does take effort
but not getting too tight and you know many short sessions and all that.
I mean that's just what comes to my mind first but I'm sure other people have other thoughts as
well.
I think one thing that I may have run into is just forgetting that,
forgetting what they say and if I remember to not be too tense or be too relaxed
then that could probably help with achieving that but if I forget that
then I may just end up falling into those things.
Yeah, not be too intense or too relaxed.
It's really, I mean I think it's profound at all levels of the Buddhist teaching.
Even the Buddha Shakyamiri taught that in the more foundational teachings and it's often quoted
and it's so essential because it can apply I think at all levels.
But all that, I mean so it's about how do we bring balance.
It's with the metaphor of a string being taught or loose.
There has to be an effort to make it just right so that it functions as it can.
Like there, definitely like it says here in this quote, we have to apply effort.
The nature of the mind itself doesn't have to be changed or built or made better
but our habit is to not see it.
Our habit is to totally be so contrived and tense
and all these different dynamic creative ways of getting cocooned in our own little grasping web.
And so all this like being too tight or too loose
or bringing out good positive conditions of body and speech and even mind.
I think this is really meaning we've talked about it quite a bit about creating positive habits.
Creating good healthy uplifting circumstances.
Really reducing or eliminating the negative disturbing reactive situations internally and
externally.
And all that is totally on the relative level.
Like how do we do good and avoid harm and create a situation so that on the absolute level
that open, relaxed, always present, unchanging, unstained awareness can be seen.
It's like the sky.
You don't have to make the sky be open and spacious
but in order to see that if your window is dirty you have to clean the window.
Then the sky can be as open and spacious as it wants
but if it's a dirty window then it doesn't really matter.
It won't really help just to hear oh it's spacious.
So I think it's practical and not just practical but essential
bringing the relative and the absolute or the form and formless aspects of ourselves
and the teachings together in a natural balance union
like their talk that Buddha and all these great masters.
I think a related point is just that at least part of bringing that kind of balance
is or at least I think one of the keys is just mindfulness.
And they talk about that in the chapter that like how can we know whether we're too tired or too
loose
and that's really mindfulness being and maybe sometimes they say it in different words
like conscientiousness or alertness but in general it's that sense of being
or they do talk about it as a watcher in this chapter.
So just like that we have to be a little bit aware of what's going on
and that's really where we can be not too close watching
because then that's too tight but also not too loose
and not watching enough getting dull.
So for myself anyway I think mindfulness is part of the key to finding that balance.
Well I find when I get busy even if I sit down it's hard to relax
and if my life is busy when I'm busy then I can't.
It would be very difficult for me to do this.
So then when that happens like what do you find helpful to like to relax?
Sometimes. It's just that's the way life is you know.
But going outdoors helps or sometimes taking a walk if I had to talk for a walk.
I think maybe to like sometimes with shawmata meditation is good I think.
For me I find it helpful like at the beginning of practice
if you're just doing all kinds of activities and I mean it depends on where you're coming from
as a practitioner and your level of understanding too I guess
but for me personally I find it helpful if I have a lot of activity like mental activity
or physical movement then when I sit down then a little bit of shawmata meditation can be really
helpful.
And also sometimes reflecting on those like they say at every meditation session
those four thoughts that reverse the mind from some side
just to kind of just like clear some space and remember why I'm even sitting
or practicing formally you know and then even though it's not like something
I mean like what they're saying here all you have to do is sit on your cushion and stay there you
know
but like everybody seems to be saying too like once the conditions come together
then they're spontaneously that meditation or awareness seems like it would be there.
I mean always with a path that's taught a union of accumulating merit and accumulating wisdom
and accumulating merit is developing positive you could say developing positive concepts
it is like developing conceptual merit and then realizing non-conceptual wisdom
like there's literally nothing we can do to make non-conceptual wisdom more non-conceptual
it's just it's just it's open you can't make it more open it's infinitely open
but then to see that then it's always taught this accumulating merit
accumulating conceptual merit generating positive qualities
it's always I mean it's just to reiterate all these things we've been going over so many times
the earlier chapters talk about refuge and bodhicitta connecting to our motivation
bringing all beings to mind seeing samsara and wanting to turn away from it
really connecting genuinely with our teacher and with the lineage and cultivating that devotion
like all that in a fabricated sense is totally contrived pretending unnatural
deluded when it's in the grasping mind but if we're not in pure non-grasping awareness already
then we have to grasp we have to bring up devotion and compassion and love and attentiveness
and hold an object so we don't run around everywhere like we have to grasp
and there's a really big difference we talked about this before but positive grasping and negative
grasping
positive accumulation of merit versus negative dispersal of all the good things
like just totally wasting our time and wasting our life we have to positively build something
and there's just no way around it and it seems like the teachings are really clear about that
there's no way around what is it you like fake it till you make it
contrive until it's natural there's so many teachings really say that
so I guess a little how would you relate that back to here that you know when we're talking about
you have to you know build these positive qualities and then we're also we have practices like this
where it's sit on the cushion that's it I mean of course you know we also have the posture
and all these you know supports that we have there but how do we relate those two
maybe that's that's part of like the three frames of practice when we have a formal practice
session
right we have those three frames which are the first one is really setting up those conditions
you know and just in a really simple way of framing that there's you know like Andrew mentioned
like reflecting on the four thoughts that turn the mind like towards the Dharma
and towards our practice and ignites our bodhicitta and our inspiration and our aspiration
widens our view and softens our heart and opens our minds and you know along with that
recalling and bringing into presence feeling the presence of the Buddha you know all the bodhisatt
vas
Guru and Pashayi all the lineage masters and really connecting with the Buddha
Dharma Sanka taking really a reaffirming you know our closeness feeling and our dedication
and our joy you know in commitment to like following the path you know to fruition
you know and for the benefit of all beings and generating bodhicitta you know all these things
they are part of that process of setting up these positive kind of conditions
and then these other parts you know make have being in a nice space you know
as a part of nurturing that balancing our body in our speech you know clearing the winds
doing something you know prior that helps us calm our body speech in mind a little
so clearing the winds having a good posture you know maybe like Andrew mentioned
doing a little with our mind we've also we've contemplated these other things
but then we'll be doing a little shamatha or something and then the middle section
would then be you know the main practice which in this sense is just relaxing that
you know just letting go like we've set up all these beautiful conditions
and put our concentration towards these like positive qualities and things
and but then we're going to just within that relax like follow the instructions that are here
and then the third frame is once we've fulfilled that intention of our main practice
and dedicating you know that merit for all beings and connecting with our aspirations
so like just the way those three frames kind of set that up
and of course we could get more and more elaborate and different kinds of practice but that's it
and then maybe two maybe it's a good way to segue into the second point
which kind of goes over that how that's how to build up a practice too
because if maybe we're just beginning and we're trying to like just completely relax
into this ocean pure nature for like an hour straight it's kind of not practical
so like I mean but just like little by little so even in that main practice
maybe we go on to that and we can talk more of something
okay yeah so we'll do this yeah do this quick very short summary and then we'll read that
so in this second part of this chapter which is say that and go kind of go over this story
about how to find a good balance in one's practice being not too tight or too loose
but it's like an instrument that is properly tuned without being too tight or loose
and then give the example of this monastic who used to be a mandolin player
and kind of was having difficulty with the practice either too tense or too relaxed
and then Buddha gave him that instruction don't be too tight and don't be too loose
and understood and then could apply fine balance more easily
then finally Rinpoche say with this proper balance your practice will go very well
as a beginner it's best to do short sessions many times
and gradually extend the length of the sessions as your practice becomes more stable
since Buddhist meditation is always based on love and compassion for all beings
always spend some time dedicating the merit at the conclusion of your session
which actually greatly multiplies the merit of your practice
so then we'll read the second part
this is from page 63 the last paragraph
when you meditate with the proper balance you can reach enlightenment and discover the primordial
nature
as a beginner it is best to practice for many short periods
and gradually extend the sessions to longer and longer periods of time
meditate for as long as you have time and when you finish
dedicate the merit for the benefit of all sentient beings
Buddhist meditation is always based on love for all beings
so you should conclude your practice with thoughts of compassion and loving kindness
when you dedicate the merit to others it does not mean that you lose that merit
actually it multiplies your merit
so it is good to always complete your meditation session by spending a few minutes
dedicating the merit for the benefit of all sentient beings
can I add something to what I was talking about before we went to that
but just as far as relating back to that last question too
but in that main practice that middle section of our practice session
kind of how it relates to this drop by drop little sessions
so even if say we have a whole hour to practice
we can spend some time in the first part with refuge, bodhicitta etc
but then in that main section where we are focusing on just meditating
on the nature of mind just connecting with that
we can still even within that have little sessions
where we say okay I am going to totally relax for a minute or something
and then we can then maybe spend another few minutes
actually then again connecting with our bodhicitta
or reciting a mantra or whatever else
as something that is again instead of just getting distracted or sleepy or dull
something that helps kind of bring more clarity to and reaffirming what we are doing
and re-inspiring and having stabilizing our concentration
and then again then we can relax for another
I mean that is just another thing I know I find helpful
depending on different things just kind of even within that main session
we can have these little sessions where we are totally relaxing
and then come back with something that helps to kind of re-strengthen that
and then relax and then for whatever amount we are kind of committed to do
and then dedicate per now
and I think I know for myself too something that is helpful too
is to really have whenever we are going to have our meditation session definitely day to day
that is really good in having that continuum as a regular thing day to day
so kind of for like myself setting up a time that I can most likely
always do and while it is so nice to practice
there is also other aspects to our practice and our life and our activities
so just at least for ourselves to know what can we always know we can do
and have that joy of something to look forward to
and then it doesn't become a big burden if other things come up
we can't do our session for a really long time
but just know oh every morning I can at least do whatever 15 minute meditation
and if we can do more great or whatever
I'm just using that number as an example but I find that helpful too
so within the session itself we can have those periods of just trying
to be mindful, relaxing and then re-strengthen that and relax
but then also on our day to day kind of making sure we follow through
and give ourselves and with our body to everyone that respect
of keeping our practice time and having it be something that we can practically do
this seems like kind of a simple thing but I find that easily a challenge
I think related to that really pithy point of having short sessions many times
that that's really applicable in post meditation practice
because it's like for one day, any time I hear a doorbell today I'll look to my mind
any time I pet my doggy I'll look at my mind
and then next day okay any time I have to turn left when I'm driving I'll look to my mind
any time I hear the word hello I look to my mind
and then keep changing up these little reminders and kind of stay fresh
but in the same way it becomes a short meditation session
look to the mind just do it for a few seconds
and then we get in the habit of just looking to the mind
and then a day change then pick another reminder in the morning
any time I see the red square or whatever look at a stop sign
see someone with a blonde hair like there's all kinds of little things
didn't look to the mind look to the mind
it becomes like little ways of having short sessions many times
which is all about like increasing the stability
like the whole big thing with mindfulness is just to remember to imply the instruction
what is the instruction am I applying it
and this is kind of really tactical in post meditation
when we're out and about like we're almost all always doing all the time
because it's so busy now but I find that that's helpful
and that's really good too because it's also kind of helps break down that separation
we might make between practice and life
you know really blending that meditation and post meditation kind of
yeah for the sake of telemarkers I used to tell myself
anytime I hear the phone ring
look to the nature of mind so I'm not angry when I pick up the phone
and it's so I wanted to sell me something
makes it easier on them
that's a good question
I was just wondering this is actually from kind of more the first part of the chapter
but on page 61 it's the second paragraph
and it's just kind of right in the middle of the paragraph
there's this line that says inner awareness is different than external awareness
it is called clear light emptiness
and I just wasn't sure what the difference was
between inner awareness and external awareness
or what is primarily what is external awareness
because they say what inner awareness is
yeah here I think they're really talking it's specific to this paragraph
because right before that they say without analyzing one's experiences
or being disturbed by thoughts
and then they go to make this distinction between inner awareness and external awareness
so here I think they're really talking about external awareness
like our usual way of grasping at appearances
following after experiences
pushing away from things
leading kind of
having a big narrative in our minds
and kind of grasping after that narrative
or getting upset or whatever
so that is being external awareness
as opposed to this internal awareness
which is what they're talking about in the chapter
recognizing how our mind is before it grabs on to anything
so that non grasping awareness
or it seems like someone like that too
is external awareness
like in the awareness of any object
you know like keeping the mind on any object at all
even meditation or anything
so that would be external from the sense of
there is a subject
taking an object
or taking an object of perception
as the focus
instead of
I guess
so you could say like
external awareness is dualistic awareness
and internal awareness is non-dualistic?
could you say it that way?
it's really specific to how they're talking about it here
I think they're talking about it really generally
because it doesn't mean any time you're aware of an object
you're dualistic
because a Buddha's aware of so many objects
Kambhramiches are aware of so many objects
the thing is
if you first are aware of your internal awareness
or your own nature of mind
and while abiding in that nature of mind
allow its natural knowing capacity
to clearly arise as objects
as thoughts, as wisdom awareness
then there's not a problem
there's not a division there
because we're in a state of awareness
that doesn't create that sense of a contracted me
versus other things
so that separation is not there
so then it's called wisdom display
and that's related to what you brought up before
of the awareness
so there's a primordial nature
this chapter is on the primordial nature
the true nature
and then there's a different thing about actually
being aware of that true nature
so the primordial nature itself
whether it's the nature of an out
of yourself or an object phenomena
that's called in Buddhism Darmadattu
and then the awareness of that nature
which we're trying to recognize
and cultivate in this chapter
is called Dharmakaya
so the awareness of the nature
and the nature itself
there is this slight distinction there
and then the awareness of objects
this Darmadattu is more
the pure objects
but pure objects
like the nature of them is pure as Darmadattu
and what's aware of that
is pure subjectivity, pure awareness
Dharmakaya
Areekpa
That's one of the definitions
so there's an apparent polarity
of subject-object
but it's pure subject and pure object
as a Buddha experiences their awareness
experiencing its arising clarity display
so you don't have this
samsaric tension there
Thank you, that's helpful
I think another point with this
is there's so many polarities here
and often in the Zogchen teachings
we get into these
and it can be confusing
it definitely has for me
like we have to make effort
but the true nature is effortlessly accomplished
I mean just all these kind of things
about grasping and non-grasping
contriving and not contriving
and a lot of times
in the Zogchen teachings
they do make this distinction
like there's an awareness that doesn't grasp
and there's awareness that grasps
or there's they say
we need to take effort to see our nature
but once we see our nature
it's called a natural effortlessness
the nature itself has a natural energy
that continues
and so it doesn't require a constrained grasping effort
but a natural joyful effort arises
because that's the nature of the mind
and similarly with Shyamata
often times we might think
well maybe we do Shyamata first
and then once we get beyond that
we'll just divide in the nature all the time
but that abiding
the actual sustaining
or abiding in the nature is Shyamata
it's called the union of Shyamata and Vipassana
or just it's exactly the title of this chapter
how do we continually meditate on the nature of mind
it's non-dual Shyamata
or natural effortless Shyamata
but so there's a lot of these polarities
and almost all of them you can say
grasping fill in the blank
or non-grasping fill in the blank
grasping effort, non-grasping effort
grasping joy, non-grasping joy
I mean it's just really
and I found that for myself
it's clarified some points
that were otherwise would be really confusing
grasping mind, non-grasping mind
I thought another quick point
this chapter is meditating on the nature of mind
and just to point out that there's a lot of the other chapters
like the primordial nature or emptiness
or union of emptiness and compassion
that these are really talking about the view
what is the nature of mind
whereas this chapter in particular is talking about
how to sustain the recognition of the nature of mind
and it's very clear that Buddhist teachings
and his kambhramiches is taught
the view always comes first
we have to see where we're going
before we take steps to go there
we have to recognize our nature
before we can sustain that recognition
like that's why study is so important
before we meditate
or that's why we have to see
what is the nature before we can sustain that recognition
this tawa, the view is always
and so many masters have emphasized that point
and so we're kind of jumping into this chapter
as if we're just dividing somehow
and we haven't really said what we're abiding in
but all of these other chapters have really gone over that
it's really as to what Liah said earlier
about the importance of setting up our practice
that in the context of the three frames
it's not like all you do is just sit on the cushion and do nothing
I mean you really do do a lot of these
setting up the view and connecting with the meaning of the practice
and establishing the proper conditions
and then this chapter
we apply the instructions of this chapter
or just kind of tying that together
and the way that all fits with just the whole three
you know, reading, listening to the teachings
and then contemplating them, really thinking
and then there's this part of meditating
like how that relates to the same kind of idea of the view
and then the practice that goes with that view
as it seems like starting these chapters
we just started previously
and this section of the book in the next two chapters
are definitely more about actually practicing
you know, with that view
kind of tying into the view
there was kind of in the terms that go with the study sheet
one of the, under primordial nature, the quote is
Buddha nature transcends the four extremes
of existence, non-existence, both, and neither
and I was hoping anyone could kind of elaborate more on that
because I think, you know, existence, non-existence
has a level of clarity to it
but then the both, the neither
I thought maybe that'd be useful to go, could be useful
though we should also keep in mind our time
and getting to the big discussion
we should just be on all extremes, any extreme whatsoever
and all those are based on the notion of entity
that something's really there
so not having anything substantial
has actually existed there
aside from the nature
aside from that experience of that nature itself
where the nature displayed
it's the quintessential definition
of Mnyamaka middle way teachings
beyond these four extremes
the Quatrelama, it's the Mnyamaka view
which is said to be exactly identical to the Dzogchen view
when you apply it in practice
that any position you take assumes that you're taking a position
and it's omitting other positions
so it's partial
you're saying it's this way
and by definition it's not that way
so it's saying, Mnyamaka is saying it's not this way
that's a partial, it's not only that way
because that's partial, it leaves out this part
it's not both because they're mutually exclusive
they can't both be there without a contradiction
and then the fourth, neither, there's no alternative
there's no conceptual alternative that's possible
and this is literally logic
I mean this is logically talking about all logical possibilities
Mnyamaka is used to exhaust all logical possibilities or concepts
so we can go beyond conceptual grasping mind
and recognize non-conceptual wisdom
so it's technically saying, of all logical possibilities
you investigate each of those four positions
this, not this, both, neither
and you can see that each produces an internal contradiction
so logically it's not a feasible position at all
and you're only left to have to directly realize
what it is that's frustrated
because there's no position to it that works
because they all break apart when you look at them closely enough
and which is what Mnyamaka does so well
so look at how any conceptual position
includes a logical and inherent logical contradiction
so you have to go beyond a conceptual position
to realize a non-conceptual awareness
I thought the one thing I just thought to mention
that I think is really important on this point too
is the vision between meditation and not meditation
is that we often spend a lot of time reading
to reading and looking at computers
and doing a lot of heavy conceptual work
so it's nice too to apply these instructions
like when we're studying Mnyamaka or the teachings
or looking at the computer
just like when our mind gets tired
which it does from doing all that stuff all the time
and just like we're reading or studying
then just taking a step back and trying to do that
you know, recognize the nature within that
and just let it go, just relax
for just short periods like throughout the day
and I think that, I don't know, I just wanted to say that
because I know we spend so much time
doing all this heavy duty conceptual work
and Rinpoche's often say don't let it hover in the brain
it has to sink in the heart
and just pausing and just really connecting to the meaning
is exactly that process
that's a profound 5th instruction with studying
and integrating our lives into the practice
and I just wanted to say real quickly
that final point about dedicating the merit
which is almost an additional point to this chapter
they said that's one of the extraordinary teachings of the Buddha
that in the end we reaffirm our bodhicitta motivation
and totally give away any of the merit or benefit
that comes about from our practice
and often times there's the idea and worldly view
when you work so hard to gather this thing
then it's kind of foolish to just give it away
because you're left with nothing
but in this view connecting to like this true nature
it only glorifies the true nature
and it only opens our abilities and our wisdom
and our loving heart more and more
the more we're constantly work
just put all this work and energy into getting this good thing
and just totally give it away
and it just multiplies
it's a beautiful extraordinary teaching of Buddha Shakyamuni
and give it away to all beings
and it becomes greater
it's the profound beauty of transcendental generosity
recognizing the nature and giving away aspiring
it's like this seamless interdependence
of this seamless union of the absolute and the relative
it's beautiful in that statement
I didn't understand the logic of why it multiplies
because it's no longer within a fixed frame of reference
we draw all the frame of reference
and once we draw all frame of reference where are we?
we're not in any singular position
we're everything
it's everything, limitless
we totally just sink into open infinite primordial awareness
and from there what's its expression?
its natural expression is infinite all inclusive love and compassion
that sensitively engages with and responds to and affirms other beings
all arising phenomena
so that's how it becomes infinite
I mean not just multiplying, it becomes infinite
we're no longer one person with one little bag of Santa Claus goodies
it's infinite, maybe Santa Claus has some abilities too
but we're not in any singular position
we're not in any singular position
by this merit may all obtain omniscience
may it defeat the enemy wrongdoing
from the stormy waves of birth, old age, sickness and death
from the ocean of samsara may I free all beings
the precious bodhicitta and those without it may it be generated
and those who have it may it never diminish
but always continue increasing